---
source: UnderstandingDeepLearning_02_09_26_C.pdf
page_key: 354
book_page: 354
pdf_page: 368
chapter: "18 - Diffusion models"
chapter_slug: ch18-diffusion-models
ocr_sources:
  - deepseek-ocr-2
  - ppstructurev3
fusion_status: fused
confidence: medium
figure_count: 0
---
point (figure 18.4). It can be computed by considering the joint distribution $q(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{z}_{1\ldots t})$ and marginalizing over all the variables except $z_{t}$ : 

$$
\begin{align*}q(\mathbf{z}_{t})&=\iint q(\mathbf{z}_{1\ldots t}|\mathbf{x})d\mathbf{z}_{1\ldots t-1}d\mathbf{x}\\&=\iint q(\mathbf{z}_{1\ldots t}|\mathbf{x})Pr(\mathbf{x})d\mathbf{z}_{1\ldots t-1}d\mathbf{x},\end{align*} \quad (18.9)
$$

 where $q(\mathbf{z}_{1\ldots t}|\mathbf{x})$ was defined in equation 18.3.

However, since we now have an expression for the diffusion kernel $q(\mathbf{z}_{t}|\mathbf{x})$ that "skips" the intervening variables, we can equivalently write: 

$$
q(\mathbf{z}_{t})=\int q(\mathbf{z}_{t}|\mathbf{x})P r(\mathbf{x})d\mathbf{x}. \quad (18.10)
$$

 Hence, if we repeatedly sample from the data distribution $Pr(\mathbf{x})$ and superimpose the diffusion kernel $q(\mathbf{z}_{t}|\mathbf{x})$ on each sample, the result is the marginal distribution $q(\mathbf{z}_{t})$ (figure 18.4). However, the marginal distribution cannot be written in closed form because we don't know the original data distribution $Pr(\mathbf{x})$ .

## 18.2.3 Conditional distribution $q(\mathbf{z}_{t-1}|\mathbf{z}_t)$ We defined the conditional probability $q(\mathbf{z}_{t}|\mathbf{z}_{t-1})$ as the mixing process (equation 18.2). To reverse this process, we apply Bayes' rule:

This is intractable since we cannot compute the marginal distribution $q(\mathbf{z}_{t-1}|\mathbf{z}_t)$.

For this simple 1D example, it's possible to evaluate $q(\mathbf{z}_{t-1}|\mathbf{z}_t)$ numerically (figure 18.5). In general, their form is complex, but in many cases, they are well-approximated by a normal distribution. This is important because when we build the decoder, we will approximate the reverse process using a normal distribution.

## 18.2.4 Conditional diffusion distribution $q(\mathbf{z}_{t-1}|\mathbf{z}_t,\mathbf{x})$ There is one final distribution related to the encoder to consider. We noted above that we could not find the conditional distribution $q(\mathbf{z}_{t-1}|\mathbf{z}_t)$ because we do not know the marginal distribution $q(\mathbf{z}_{t-1})$ . However, if we know the starting variable x, then we do know the distribution $q(\mathbf{z}_{t-1}|\mathbf{x})$ at the time before. This is just the diffusion kernel (figure 18.3), and it is normally distributed.

Hence, it is possible to compute the conditional diffusion distribution $q(\mathbf{z}_{t-1}|\mathbf{x})$ in closed form (figure 18.6). This distribution is used to train the decoder. It is the distribution over $z_{t-1}$ when we know the current latent variable $z_t$ and the training
