---
source: UnderstandingDeepLearning_02_09_26_C.pdf
page_key: 364
book_page: 364
pdf_page: 378
chapter: "18 - Diffusion models"
chapter_slug: ch18-diffusion-models
ocr_sources:
  - deepseek-ocr-2
  - ppstructurev3
fusion_status: fused
confidence: medium
figure_count: 0
---
Algorithm 18.1: Diffusion model training

Input: Training data x
Output: Model parameters $\phi\_t$

repeat
for $i \in B$ do // For every training index in batch
$t \sim \mathrm{Uniform}[1, \ldots T]$ // Sample random timestep
$\epsilon \sim \mathrm{Norm}[0, I]$ // Sample noise

$\ell\_i = \|\mathbf{g}\_t\left[\sqrt{\alpha\_t}\mathbf{x}\_i + \sqrt{1 - \alpha\_t} \epsilon, \phi\_t\right] - \mathbf{\varepsilon}\|^2$ // Compute individual loss

Accumulate losses for batch and take gradient step until converged

Algorithm 18.2: Sampling

Input: Model, $\mathbf{g}\_t[\bullet,\phi\_t]$

Output: Sample, x

$z\_T \sim \mathrm{Norm}\_\mathbf{z}[0,I]$ // Sample last latent variable

for $t = T \ldots 2$ do
$\hat{\mathbf{z}}\_{t-1} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{1-\beta\_t}}\mathbf{z}\_t - \frac{\beta\_t}{\sqrt{1-\alpha\_t}\sqrt{1-\beta\_t}}\mathbf{g}\_t[\mathbf{z}\_{t},\phi\_{t}]$ // Predict previous latent variable
$\epsilon \sim \mathrm{Norm}\_\mathbf{\varepsilon}[0,I]$ // Draw new noise vector
$\mathbf{z}\_{t-1} = \hat{\mathbf{z}}\_{t-1} + \sigma\_t\epsilon$ // Add noise to previous latent variable
$\mathbf{x} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{1-\beta\_1}}\mathbf{z}\_1 - \frac{\beta\_1}{\sqrt{1-\alpha\_1}\sqrt{1-\beta\_1}}\mathbf{g}\_1[\mathbf{z}\_{1},\phi\_{1}]$ // Generate sample from $\mathbf{z}\_1$ without noise

## 18.6.1 Application to images

Diffusion models have been very successful in modeling image data. Here, we need to construct models that can take a noisy image and predict the noise that was added at each step. The obvious architectural choice for this image-to-image mapping is the U-Net (figure 11.10). However, there may be a very large number of diffusion steps, and training and storing multiple U-Nets is inefficient. The solution is to train a single U-Net that also takes a predetermined vector representing the time step as input (figure 18.9). In practice, this is resized to match the number of channels at each stage of the U-Net and used to offset and/or scale the representation at each spatial position.

A large number of time steps are needed as the conditional probabilities  $q(\mathbf{z}\_{t-1}|\mathbf{z}\_t)$  become closer to normal when the hyperparameters  $\beta\_t$  are close to zero, matching the form of the decoder determined vector representing the time step as input (figure 18.9). In practice, this is resized to match the number of channels at each stage of the U-Net and used to offset and/or scale the representation at each spatial position.

## 18.6.2 Improving generation speed

The loss function (equation 18.40) requires the diffusion kernel to have the form $q(\mathbf{z}\_{t}|\mathbf{x}) = \mathrm{Norm}[\sqrt{\alpha\_{t}}\mathbf{x}, \sqrt{1 - \alpha\_{t}} \cdot \mathbf{I}]$. The same loss function will be valid for any forward process
