---
source: UDL_Answer_Booklet_Students.pdf
source_id: udlbook-answer-booklet-students
page_key: 31
answer_page: 31
pdf_page: 31
chapter: 7 - Gradients and initialization
chapter_slug: ch07-gradients-and-initialization
extraction_method: pymupdf-text
fusion_status: text-extract
restricted: true
---

31
Problem 7.13 For the same function in problem 7.12, compute the derivative ∂y/∂x by forward-
mode differentiation. In other words, compute in order:
∂f1
∂x , ∂f2
∂x , ∂f3
∂x , ∂f4
∂x , ∂f5
∂x , and ∂y
∂x,
using the chain rule in each case to make use of the derivatives already computed. Why do
we not use forward-mode differentiation when we calculate the parameter gradients for deep
networks?
Answer
The derivatives are:
∂f1
∂x
=
exp[x]
∂f2
∂x
=
∂f2
∂f1
∂f1
∂x = 2f1 exp[x]
∂f3
∂x
=
∂f3
∂f1
∂f1
∂x + ∂f3
∂f2
∂f2
∂x = exp[x](1 + 2f1)
∂f4
∂x
=
∂f4
∂f3
∂f3
∂x = exp[x](1 + 2f1) exp[f3]
∂f5
∂x
=
∂f5
∂f3
∂f3
∂x = exp[x](1 + 2f1) cos[f3]
∂y
∂x
=
∂y
∂f4
∂f4
∂x + ∂y
∂f5
∂f5
∂x = exp[x] (exp[f3] + cos[f3] + 2f1(exp[f3] + cos[f3])) .
We don’t use forward mode differentiation because we need to compute intermediate terms
∂y/∂• to update the gradients and these naturally fall out of reverse mode differentiation.
Problem 7.14 Consider a random variable a with variance Var[a] = σ2 and a symmetrical
distribution around the mean E[a] = 0. Prove that if we pass this variable through the ReLU
function:
b = ReLU[a] =
(
0
a < 0
a
a ≥0 ,
then the second moment of the transformed variable is E[b2] = σ2/2.
Problem 7.15 What would you expect to happen if we initialized all of the weights and biases
in the network to zero?
Problem 7.16 Implement the code in figure 7.8 in PyTorch and plot the training loss as a
function of the number of epochs.
Problem 7.17 Change the code in figure 7.8 to tackle a binary classification problem. You will
need to (i) change the targets y so they are binary, (ii) change the network to predict numbers
between zero and one (iii) change the loss function appropriately.
Copyright ©2023 Simon Prince.
