---
source: UDL_Answer_Booklet_Students.pdf
source_id: udlbook-answer-booklet-students
pdf_page: 18
chapter: 5 - Loss functions
chapter_slug: ch05-loss-functions
restricted: true
---

18
5
Loss functions
which can be simplified to:
L =
I
X
i=1
−cos[yi −f[xi, ϕ]],
by removing constant additive and multiplicative factors.
To perform inference you would take the maximum of the distribution which is just the predicted
parameter µ.
This may be out of the range [−π, π], in which case we would add / remove
multiples of 2π until it is in the original range.
Problem 5.4
Sometimes, the predictions y for a given input x are naturally multimodal as
in figure 5.14a from book; there is more than one valid prediction for a given input. In this
case, we might use a weighted sum of normal distributions as the distribution over the output.
This is known as a mixture of Gaussians model . For example, a mixture of two Gaussians has
distribution parameters θ = {λ, µ1, σ2
1, µ2, σ2
2} is defined by:
Pr(y|λ, µ1, µ2, σ2
1, σ2
2) =
λ
p
2πσ2
1
exp
−(y −µ1)2
2σ2
1

+
1 −λ
p
2πσ2
2
exp
−(y −µ2)2
2σ2
2

,
where λ ∈[0, 1] controls the relative weight of the two normal distributions, which have
means µ1, µ2 and variances σ2
1, σ2
2, respectively. This model can represent a distribution with
two peaks (figure 5.14b from book) or a distribution with one peak but a more complex shape
(figure 5.14c from book).
Use the recipe from section 5.2 to construct a loss function for training a model f[x, ϕ] that
takes input x, has parameters ϕ, and predicts a mixture of two Gaussians. The loss should be
based on I training data pairs {xi, yi}. What possible problems do you foresee when we perform
inference in this model?
Answer
The loss function can be written as:
L = −
I
X
i=1
log
"
sig[f1[xi, ϕ]]
p
2πf3[xi, ϕ]2 exp
−(yi −f2[xi, ϕ])2
2f3[xi, ϕ]2

+ 1 −sig[f1[xi, ϕ]]
p
2πf5[xi, ϕ]2
exp
−(yi −f4[xi, ϕ])2
2f5[xi, ϕ]2
#
Inference is slightly more tricky as there is no simple closed form expression for the mode of this
distribution. We might have to find it using optimization. See http://www.cs.toronto.edu/
~miguel/research/GMmodes.html for further details.
Copyright ©2023 Simon Prince.
