---
source: UDL_Answer_Booklet_Students.pdf
source_id: udlbook-answer-booklet-students
page_key: 64
answer_page: 64
pdf_page: 64
chapter: 17 - Variational autoencoders
chapter_slug: ch17-variational-autoencoders
extraction_method: pymupdf-text
fusion_status: text-extract
restricted: true
---

64
17
Variational autoencoders
The left-hand side is a distance and so it must be non-negative and hence we have:
Eq [log[Pr(x|z, ϕ]]]−DKL
h
q(z|x)||Pr(z)
i
= log[Pr(x|ϕ)−DKL
h
q(z|x)||Pr(z|x, ϕ)
i
≤log[Pr(x|ϕ).
Problem 17.5 The reparameterization trick computes the derivative of an expectation of a
function f[x]:
∂
∂ϕEP r(x|ϕ)

f[x]

,
with respect to the parameters ϕ of the distribution Pr(x|ϕ) that the expectation is over. Show
that this derivative can also be computed as:
∂
∂ϕEP r(x|ϕ)

f[x]

=
EP r(x|ϕ)

f[x] ∂
∂ϕ log

Pr(x|ϕ)]

≈
1
I
I
X
i=1
f[xi] ∂
∂ϕ log

Pr(xi|ϕ)]

.
This method is known as the REINFORCE algorithm or score function estimator.
Problem 17.6 Why is it better to use spherical linear interpolation rather than regular linear
interpolation when moving between points in the latent space? Hint: consider figure 8.13.
Problem 17.7 Derive the EM algorithm for the 1D mixture of Gaussians algorithm with N
components. To do this, you need to (i) find an expression for the posterior distribution Pr(z|x)
over the latent variable z ∈{1, 2, . . . , N} for a data point x and (ii) find an expression that
updates the evidence lower bound given the posterior distributions for all of the data points.
You will need to use Lagrange multipliers to ensure that the weights λ1, . . . , λN of the Gaussians
sum to one.
Answer
See section 7.4 of my previous book.
Copyright ©2023 Simon Prince.
