---
source: UDL_Answer_Booklet_Students.pdf
source_id: udlbook-answer-booklet-students
pdf_page: 19
chapter: 5 - Loss functions
chapter_slug: ch05-loss-functions
restricted: true
---

19
Problem 5.5 Consider extending the model from problem 5.3 to predict the wind direction using
a mixture of two von Mises distributions. Write an expression for the likelihood Pr(y|θ) for this
model. How many outputs will the network need to produce?
Problem 5.6 Consider building a model to predict the number of pedestrians y ∈{0, 1, 2, . . .}
that will pass a given point in the city in the next minute, based on data x that contains
information about the time of day, the longitude and latitude, and the type of neighborhood.
A suitable distribution for modeling counts is the Poisson distribution (figure 5.15 from book).
This has a single parameter λ > 0 called the rate that represents the mean of the distribution.
The distribution has probability density function:
Pr(y = k) = λke−λ
k!
.
Use the recipe in section 5.2 to design a loss function for this model assuming that we have
access to I training pairs {xi, yi}.
Problem 5.7 Consider a multivariate regression problem where we predict 10 outputs so y ∈
R10 and model each with an independent normal distribution where the means µd are pre-
dicted by the network, and variances σ2 are all the same. Write an expression for the like-
lihood Pr(y|f[x, ϕ]) for this model. Show that minimizing the negative log-likelihood of this
model is still equivalent to minimizing a sum of squared terms if we don’t estimate the vari-
ance σ2.
Problem 5.8 Construct a loss function for making multivariate predictions y based on indepen-
dent normal distributions with different variances σ2
d for each dimension. Assume that this is a
heteroscedastic model so that both the means µd and variances σ2
d change as a function of the
data.
Answer
L = −
I
X
i=1
log
" Do
Y
d=1
1
p
2πf2d[xi, ϕ]2 exp

−(yid −f1d[xi, ϕ])2
2f2d[xi, ϕ]2
#
.
where f1d[xi, ϕ] predicts the mean of the dth dimension and f2d[xi, ϕ]2 predicts the variance.
Problem 5.9 Consider a multivariate regression problem in which we predict the height of an
individual in meters and their weight in kilos from some data x. Here, the units take quite
different values.
What problems do you see this causing?
Propose two solutions to these
problems.
Answer
The height uses different units than the weight and the numbers will be smaller. Consequently,
the least squares loss will focus much more on the weight than the height. Two possible solutions
Copyright ©2023 Simon Prince.
