---
source: UnderstandingDeepLearning_02_09_26_C.pdf
page_key: 40
book_page: 40
pdf_page: 54
chapter: "3 - Shallow neural networks"
chapter_slug: ch03-shallow-neural-networks
ocr_sources:
  - deepseek-ocr-2
  - ppstructurev3
fusion_status: fused
confidence: medium
figure_count: 0
---
**Problem 3.6** Following on from problem 3.5, what happens to the shallow network defined in equations 3.3 and 3.4 when we multiply the parameters \(\theta_{10}\) and \(\theta_{11}\) by a positive constant \(\alpha\) and divide the slope \(\phi_1\) by the same parameter \(\alpha\)? What happens if \(\alpha\) is negative?

**Problem 3.7** Consider fitting the model in equation 3.1 using a least squares loss function. Does this loss function have a unique minimum? i.e., is there a single "best" set of parameters?

**Problem 3.8** Consider replacing the ReLU activation function with (i) the Heaviside step function \(\operatorname{heaviside}[z]\), (ii) the hyperbolic tangent function \(\tanh[z]\), and (iii) the rectangular function \(\operatorname{rect}[z]\), where:

$$
\operatorname{heaviside}[z]=
\begin{cases}
0 & z<0\\
1 & z\geq0
\end{cases}
\qquad
\operatorname{rect}[z]=
\begin{cases}
0 & z<0\\
1 & 0\leq z\leq1\\
0 & z>1
\end{cases}.
\tag{3.15}
$$

Redraw a version of figure 3.3 for each of these functions. The original parameters were: \(\boldsymbol{\phi}=\{\phi_0,\phi_1,\phi_2,\phi_3,\theta_{10},\theta_{11},\theta_{20},\theta_{21},\theta_{30},\theta_{31}\}=\{-0.23,-1.3,1.3,0.66,-0.2,0.4,-0.9,0.9,1.1,-0.7\}\). Provide an informal description of the family of functions that can be created by neural networks with one input, three hidden units, and one output for each activation function.

**Problem 3.9*** Show that the third linear region in figure 3.3 has a slope that is the sum of the slopes of the first and fourth linear regions.

**Problem 3.10** Consider a neural network with one input, one output, and three hidden units. The construction in figure 3.3 shows how this creates four linear regions. Under what circumstances could this network produce a function with fewer than four linear regions?

**Problem 3.11*** How many parameters does the model in figure 3.6 have?

**Problem 3.12** How many parameters does the model in figure 3.7 have?

**Problem 3.13** What is the activation pattern for each of the seven regions in figure 3.8j? In other words, which hidden units are active (pass the input) and which are inactive (clip the input) for each region?

**Problem 3.14** Write out the equations that define the network in figure 3.11. There should be three equations to compute the three hidden units from the inputs and two equations to compute the outputs from the hidden units.

**Problem 3.15*** What is the maximum possible number of 3D linear regions that can be created by the network in figure 3.11?

**Problem 3.16** Write out the equations for a shallow network with two inputs, four hidden units, and three outputs. Draw this model in the style of figure 3.11.

**Problem 3.17*** Equations 3.11 and 3.12 define a general neural network with \(D_i\) inputs, one hidden layer containing \(D\) hidden units, and \(D_o\) outputs. Find an expression for the number of parameters in the model in terms of \(D_i\), \(D\), and \(D_o\).

**Problem 3.18*** Show that the maximum number of regions created by a shallow network with \(D_i=2\)-dimensional input, \(D_o=1\)-dimensional output, and \(D=3\) hidden units is seven, as in figure 3.8j. Use the result of Zaslavsky (1975) that the maximum number of regions created by partitioning a \(D_i\)-dimensional space with \(D\) hyperplanes is \(\sum_{j=0}^{D_i}\binom{D}{j}\). What is the maximum number of regions if we add two more hidden units to this model, so \(D=5\)?
