---
source: UnderstandingDeepLearning_02_09_26_C.pdf
page_key: 38
book_page: 38
pdf_page: 52
chapter: "3 - Shallow neural networks"
chapter_slug: ch03-shallow-neural-networks
ocr_sources:
  - deepseek-ocr-2
  - ppstructurev3
fusion_status: fused
confidence: medium
figure_count: 0
---
functions, which saturate (become close to zero) for large positive and large negative inputs.

However, the ReLU function has the disadvantage that its derivative is zero for negative inputs. If all the training examples produce negative inputs to a given ReLU function, then we cannot improve the parameters feeding into this ReLU during training. The gradient with respect to the incoming weights is locally flat, so we cannot "walk downhill." This is known as the dying ReLU problem. Many variations on the ReLU have been proposed to resolve this problem (figure 3.13b), including (i) the leaky ReLU (Maas et al., 2013), which also has a linear output for negative values with a smaller slope of 0.1, (ii) the parametric ReLU (He et al., 2015), which treats the slope of the negative portion as an unknown parameter, and (iii) the concatenated ReLU (Shang et al., 2016), which produces two outputs, one of which clips below zero (i.e., like a typical ReLU) and one of which clips above zero.

A variety of smooth functions have also been investigated (figure 3.13c-d), including the soft-plus function (Glorot et al., 2011), Gaussian error linear unit (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016), sigmoid linear unit (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016), and exponential linear unit (Clevert et al., 2015). Most of these are attempts to avoid the dying ReLU problem while limiting the gradient for negative values. Klambauer et al. (2017) introduced the scaled exponential linear unit (figure 3.13e), which is particularly interesting as it helps stabilize the variance of the activations when the input variance has a limited range (see section 7.5). Ramachandran et al. (2017) adopted an empirical approach to choosing an activation function. They searched the space of possible functions to find the one that performed best over a variety of supervised learning tasks. The optimal function was found to be $a[x]=x/(1+\exp[-\beta x])$, where $\beta$ is a learned parameter (figure 3.13f). They termed this function Swish. Interestingly, this was a rediscovery of activation functions previously proposed by Hendrycks & Gimpel (2016) and Elfwing et al. (2018). Howard et al. (2019) approximated Swish by the HardSwish function, which has a very similar shape but is faster to compute:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{HardSwish}[z] &=
\begin{cases}
0 & z<-3\\
z(z+3)/6 & -3\leq z\leq 3\\
z & z>3
\end{cases}.
\end{aligned} \quad (3.13)
$$

There is no definitive answer as to which of these activation functions is empirically superior. However, the leaky ReLU, parameterized ReLU, and many of the continuous functions can be shown to provide minor performance gains over the ReLU in particular situations. We restrict attention to neural networks with the basic ReLU function for the rest of this book because it's easy to characterize the functions they create in terms of the number of linear regions.

**Universal approximation theorem:** The width version of this theorem states that for any continuous function on a compact subset of $\mathbb{R}^n$ and for an arbitrary specified accuracy, there exists a network with one hidden layer containing a finite number of hidden units that can approximate the given function to that accuracy. This was proved by Cybenko (1989) for a class of sigmoid activations and was later shown to be true for a larger class of nonlinear activation functions (Hornik, 1991).

**Number of linear regions:** Consider a shallow network with $D_i\geq2$-dimensional inputs and $D$ hidden units. The number of linear regions is determined by the intersections of the $D$ hyperplanes created by the "joints" in the ReLU functions (e.g., figure 3.8d-f). Each region is created by a different combination of the ReLU functions clipping or not clipping the input. The number of regions created by $D$ hyperplanes in the $D_i\leq D$-dimensional input space was shown by Zaslavsky (1975) to be at most $\sum_{j=0}^{D_i}\binom{D}{j}$ (i.e., a sum of binomial coefficients). As a rule of thumb, shallow neural networks almost always have a larger number $D$ of hidden units than input dimensions $D_i$ and create between $2^{D_i}$ and $2^D$ linear regions.
